                Crime and Housing Prices
                      Keith Ihlanfeldt
                       Tom Mayock

Department of Economics and DeVoe Moore Center
                 Florida State University

                                                  February, 2009
                                                 Abstract
One of the most studied effects of crime is the impact that neighborhood crime has on
housing values. By our count 18 studies have estimated this impact. A major drawback of
these studies is that, although crime is undoubtedly endogenous in property value models,
either because of simultaneity, omitted variables or measurement error, the majority of
studies (12 studies) treat crime measures as exogenous independent variables. Of the
limited number of studies (six studies) that do address the endogeneity of crime, the
effect of crime is generally identified using questionable instruments.

The purpose of our chapter is two-fold: (1) we provide the first critical review of the
extensive literature that has dealt with the impact of crime on property values, and (2) we
exploit a unique nine-year crime panel at the neighborhood level to estimate models that
properly address the endogeneity of crime and allow us to overcome other specification
errors that have plagued previous studies.

Our results suggest that of the two major categories of crime (property and violent), only
violent crimes exert a meaningful influence upon neighborhood housing values. A 10 per
cent increase in violent crimes within a neighborhood is found to reduce housing values
by as much as 6 per cent.
Introduction

Maintaining public safety is a major responsibility of local governments that accounts for
a significant percentage of their budgets.1 To spend these dollars most effectively,
reliable estimates of the costs of crime are needed to guide policy decisions.
Unfortunately, this has proven to be a difficult task, principally because public safety
(i.e., the absence of crime) is a non-market good, whose price can only be estimated
implicitly. Typically, the market chosen to implicitly estimate the value of crime
prevention is the housing market, where a hedonic price model is estimated that includes
a measure of neighborhood crime among the regressors.

The hedonic model approach to estimating the costs of crime is attractive theoretically.
The seriousness that people attach to crime should be reflected in what they are willing to
pay to live in a low crime neighborhood. Moreover, by including crimes of different
types in the hedonic model, their relative importance can be determined. However, a
major difficulty arises in estimating the crime-housing price relationship; namely, the
endogeneity of crime must be dealt with in order to obtain consistent estimates. While the
endogeneity of crime is widely recognized, it is remarkable that of the 18 hedonic studies
we were able to find that included crime as an explanatory variable, 12 treated crime as
an exogenous variable. Of the six studies that do instrument crime, only two tested the
validity of the instruments, and in one case an overidentification test rejected the
exogeneity of the instruments. Undoubtedly, the endogeneity of crime has been skirted in
the literature for but one reason ­ it is extremely difficult to identify variables that satisfy
the conditions required of a valid instrument: 1) that the variables be highly correlated
with the endogenous crime measure, and 2) that the variables be uncorrelated with the
error term and correctly excluded from the estimated housing price equation.

The purpose of this chapter is two-fold: 1) we provide the first critical review of the
extensive literature that has dealt with the impact of crime on property values, and 2) we
exploit a unique nine-year crime panel at the neighborhood level to estimate models that
properly address the endogeneity of crime and allow us to overcome other specification
errors that have plagued previous studies. Our crime data are for census tracts in Miami-
Dade County, Florida, and they span the years 1999-2007. We combine these data with
repeat sales price indexes for single-family homes that we estimate for each tract, using
thousands of repeat sales prices obtained from the county's property tax rolls. The
endogeneity of crime is dealt with in two ways ­ we first difference the housing price
index and the crime measures which controls for various endogeneities in crime levels,
and we instrument changes in crime to allow for correlation between the crime measures
and current and past values of the idiosyncratic error. This first-differences instrumental
variables estimator allows us to consistently estimate the implicit cost of crime. We
separately estimate the effects of violent and property crime on housing values.2 Our
results indicate that only violent crime lowers neighborhood housing values. A one per
cent increase in our preferred measure of neighborhood crime (number of violent crimes
per acre) is found to reduce housing price by between .2 and .6 per cent.3

Literature review
Table 1 summarizes the 18 hedonic price studies that have included a measure of
neighborhood crime among the explanatory variables. Fourteen of the studies find a
negative, statistically significant relationship between one or more measures of crime and
house value. Among the four studies that do not find a negative effect, one (Case and
Mayer 1996) finds a positive, statistically significant effect.4 Overall, the fact that almost
80 per cent of extant studies find that crime has a negative effect on property value makes
it safe to conclude that crime matters to people and that they are willing to pay a higher
housing price in order to avoid it. Unfortunately, however, little can be said regarding
which crimes matter most based upon the studies that have been done. Seven of the 14
studies that find a negative crime effect measure crime with a single variable (four use
total crime, two use property crime, and one uses homicides). The seven studies that have
more than one crime variable yield highly mixed results. In particular, there appears to be
little consensus on whether violent crime is more or less important to people than
property crime.

Both studies employing a single crime variable and those using multiple crime variables
have their limitations (apart from the endogeneity of crime problem discussed below).
The single crime variable studies can be divided into two types ­ those that use a total
crimes measure and those that measure the incidence of only a single type of crime (e.g.,
property crime, but not violent crime, or just homicides).5 A simple count measure of the
total number of crimes implicitly gives each type of crime the same weight. Generally,
total crimes are limited to those tracked by the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation and
labeled by the FBI as `Part I Crimes' or `indexed crimes.' These crimes include
homicide, aggravated assault, rape, robbery, burglary, larceny, and auto theft. Clearly
these crimes differ greatly in their severity,severity and a rape or murder should not be
equated with a larceny or auto theft; or, more generally, violent crimes should not be
lumped together with property crimes.6 Hence using a single total crimes measure is
subject to considerable measurement error. Moreover, measuring just a single type of
crime is subject to omitted variable bias, because, as we document below, violent and
property crimes are highly collinear. Neighborhoods with a violent crime problem are
also those with a property crime problem.

In light of these criticisms, to avoid obtaining biased estimates, the preferred approach is
to include measures of the incidence of each type of crime in the hedonic model. At a
minimum, separate violent and property crime variables should be included. The
problem, of course, as alluded to above, is that violent and property crimes are highly
collinear; hence, multicollinearity makes it difficult to separate out their separate
influences. One solution to this problem is to have panel data and first difference the data.
As we document below, crimes by type are far less collinear in changes than in levels.

Turning now to the endogeneity of crime problem, there are at least five mechanisms
whereby crime may be endogenous in a housing price model. First, neighborhoods with
cheaper housing attract lower income individuals, and it is well known that income and
the propensity to commit crime are inversely related.7 Evidence also exists which shows
that criminals commit the vast majority of their crimes within their home neighborhood
(Reppetto 1974; Pope 1980). The implication is that criminals self-select neighborhoods
to reside in with lower property values and commit many of their crimes within these
neighborhoods. Second, neighborhoods with more expensive homes attract criminals by
offering higher expected payoffs in terms of the market value of stolen goods. Third,
crime statistics are limited to only those crimes that are reported to police. Reporting
rates are known to be higher in more affluent neighborhoods (Skogan 1999). Fourth,
some unobservables that increase the attractiveness of a property (e.g., large windows or
a secluded back yard) also make the property an easier target for crime (Gibbons 2004).

The above mechanisms all suggest that higher housing prices may raise neighborhood
crime levels. A final mechanism, that suggests that crime will be less prevalent in more
affluent neighborhoods, is the deterrence provided by self-protection measures. Self-
protection is expected to be greater in wealthier neighborhoods because property owners
are more able to afford it and they have more at risk.

As noted above, while most studies have treated crime as exogenous to housing price, six
studies have treated crime as an endogenous variable. However, only one of these studies
(Gibbons 2004) fully validates the choice of instrumental variables (both first-stage
regression results and, where equations are overidentified, tests of overidentifying
restrictions were reported); and the instruments used by all studies are open to question.
We review each of the studies that has treated crime as an endogenous variable below.
Rizzo (1979) is the first study to instrument crime in a hedonic price model. He regresses
the 1970 median contract rent or owner-estimated house value for 71 neighborhood
communities (which are collections of census tracts) within the city of Chicago on the
total crime rate reported for 21 police districts, with each neighborhood community
assigned to a police district. To instrument the crime rate the following variables are
used: the proportion of the population between ages 15 and 24, median years of
schooling, the unemployment rate, population density, the proportion of the population
receiving welfare, ratio of males to females, and the labor force participation rate. In both
the rent and house value regressions, the coefficient on the crime variable using the
instrumental variables estimator is substantially larger in absolute magnitude than the
coefficient in the OLS model. Rizzo interprets his results as lending support to the
position that simultaneity between crime and house value (rent) is a significant problem.
Rizzo reports neither the first-stage regression results nor overidentification test results.
Moreover, a number of his instruments proxy neighborhood quality and therefore
probably should not have been excluded from his hedonic model.8 His evidence and
conclusions are therefore open to question.

Chronologically, the next study to instrument crime is by Naroff et al. (1980). Using
Boston census tracts as the units of observation, the authors jointly estimate two
equations ­ one with the dependent variable equal to the median owner-estimated house
value of the tract and the other with the dependent variable equal to the total crime rate.
The two variables that enter the crime rate equation that do not appear in the value
equation (and thereby serve as instruments for the crime rate) are the population density
of the tract and a housing quality variable which is a combination of the percentage of the
units which have more than one person per room and the percentage of the units that do
not have complete plumbing facilities. The estimated elasticity of house value with
respect to the crime rate is -1.67. However, little confidence can be placed in this result
given the authors' choice of instrumental variables. In particular, it is baffling why the
housing quality variable would enter the crime but not the house value equation.

The next study to instrument crime is by Burnell (1988). Like Rizzo, Burnell's data are
for Chicago, but while Rizzo's communities lie within the city of Chicago, Burnell's are
in the suburbs. Burnell uses 1980 data from 71 communities to estimate a system of four
equations. His dependent variables are: median owner-estimated house value, the
property crime rate, the number of full time police officers per thousand population, and
per capita community revenue. The exogenous variables that enter the crime equation
which are excluded from the house value equation are: the per capita community sales tax
revenue, the average number of full time police officers per thousand population for
contiguous communities, the average of the median housing values in contiguous
communities, the average of the per capita sales tax revenue in contiguous communities,
the community poverty rate, the median family income of the community, the median
age of the community's population, the community unemployment rate, and the
proportion of the population in the community that completed high school. The estimated
elasticity of house value with respect to the property crime rate is -.10.
It is difficult to judge Burnell's identifying restrictions. No tests of exogeneity are
reported. The idea of using variables defined for contiguous communities as instruments
for the property crime rate within the home community may have merit, as they should
not affect house value in the home community but may affect the crime rate if criminals
shift from one community to another in response to differences in expected returns and
the probability of apprehension. But many of Burnell's instrumental variables simply
describe the home community and therefore likely affect what people are willing to pay
to live in the community, which suggests that they should not have been excluded from
the house value equation.

The only study from the 1990s to instrument crime is by Buck et al. (1993). Their study
is unique in that it is the first to use panel data. For the years 1972-1986 they have
property value and crime data for 64 communities located in the Atlantic City region of
New Jersey. Unfortunately, they choose not to exploit the panel nature of the data (by, for
example, including community fixed effects) but instead they estimate pooled cross-
sectional models. Their dependent variable is an estimate of the market value of a square
mile of land in the ith community in the tth time period computed from property tax
assessments. Three types of property crime are accounted for among the explanatory
variables: the larceny rate, the auto theft rate and the burglary rate. These crime rates are
instrumented using `a complete set of lagged variables,' the distance from the community
to the Atlantic City CBD, and the population density and unemployment rate of the home
community. The authors report that their instruments failed an overidentification test, but
they argue that `the test for overidentifying restrictions is not constructive in that it does
not recommend a subsequent cause of action' (Buck et al.1993, p. 342). This statement is
not totally accurate; the results from the overidentification test are constructive in that
they indicate the need to continue to search for better instruments. Buck and his
colleagues estimate numerous regressions for various subsamples of their data and obtain
mixed results. When they use the full sample, the results are not only mixed but are
somewhat counterintuitive: the larceny rate is not statistically significant, auto theft is
positive and statistically significant, and the burglary rate is negative and statistically
significant.

The final two studies that treat crime as endogenous to property value are more recent.
Using 1999-2001 data for London, England, Gibbons (2004) regresses individual house
prices (n=8084) on burglary and vandalism crimes per square kilometer, after assigning
both homes and crimes to a 100 meter grid. In the fashion of a standard fixed effects
estimator, Gibbons first transforms his data by taking deviations from local district
averages of the variables. In this way, unobservables that are constant within the district
are eliminated as a source of endogeneity. To further address the endogeneity of crime he
instruments his two crime variables (the density of burglary and vandalism crimes against
residences) using as instrument variables the density of burglary and vandalism crimes
against non-residential buildings. In an alternative model, distance to the nearest public
house or wine bar, and its polynomials, are used to instrument the density of vandalism
crimes, based on the argument that alcohol consumption is an associated factor in many
types of crimes. The instruments are found to be significantly correlated with the crime
densities and pass Sargan's test for the validity of the overidentification.
Gibbons' results indicate that vandalism but not burglary crimes have an impact on home
prices. A one-tenth standard deviation decrease in the local density of vandalism crime
adds 1 per cent to the price of an average Inner London property. He explains his
somewhat counterintuitive results by arguing that acts of vandalism (but not burglaries)
motivate fear of crime in the community and may be taken as signals or symptoms of
community instability and neighborhood deterioration in general.

Of the six studies that have addressed the endogeneity of crime problem, Gibbons' is the
only one that does so in a convincing fashion. His instrumental variables are supported
theoretically (i.e., he establishes a plausible link between the variables and crime, a
priori), and the instruments pass the standard IV validation tests. There are, however, two
concerns with his study. First, vandalism crimes are likely to be underreported relative to
burglaries and other types of crime. It is not clear whether his instrumentation adequately
handles the measurement error that arises from underreporting. Generally, measurement
error in an independent variable causes an attenuation of its estimated effect, which
suggests that Gibbons may have underestimated the negative effect that vandalism has on
property value. But we might also expect that the reporting rate would vary across
neighborhoods and thereby the measurement error may be correlated with house price. In
this case, it is difficult to predict whether the estimated effect of vandalism on property
value has been under- or over-estimated. If the instrumental variables are uncorrelated
with possible spatial variation in reporting, then consistent estimates can still be claimed.
But this seems unlikely in Gibbons' case, since the rate of vandalism against residences
(the independent variable) and the rate of vandalism against non-residential property (the
instrumental variable) are both likely to be more severely underreported in deteriorating
neighborhoods.

A second limitation of Gibbons' study is that violent crimes are excluded from his
hedonic model. As noted above, property and violent crimes are highly collinear in levels
and therefore excluding violent crimes may result in omitted variable bias. Hence, what
Gibbons observes as a negative effect of vandalism on property value may actually be the
result of a more plausible effect of violent crime on property value being registered
through the estimated vandalism coefficient.9

The most recent study to treat crime as endogenous in a hedonic price model is by Tita et
al. (2006). Their data link 43 000 house sales from Columbus, Ohio for the years 1995-
1998 to crimes at the census tract level for 189 tracts. They use three crime measures: the
total crime rate (total crimes include the seven FBI indexed crimes), the property crime
rate and the violent crime rate. They regress house price on the crime rate and the change
(measured over the preceding year) in the crime rate, running separate regressions for
each alternative measure of crime. In each equation, two crime variables (level and
change) are treated as endogenous, using as instrumental variables the murder rate and its
change, so that each equation is just identified. Four models are estimated: one for all
tracts and separate equations for low, medium, and high income tracts. The key results
are that a positive change in the violent crime rate reduces house value in low and high
income neighborhoods and the level of both the violent and property crime rate reduces
property value in high income neighborhoods. No explanation is given for the particular
pattern of significant versus insignificant results observed across the types of
neighborhoods and between levels and changes in crime.

The authors claim that murder is an `ideal' instrument because it is significantly
correlated to violent crime. Given that violent crime includes murder, such an association
is expected. However, they offer no evidence in support of their claim. They also use
murder to instrument property crime, but make no claim regarding the association
between these two variables. Because their models are exactly identified,
overidentification tests could not be done.

While the murder rate may be highly correlated with the endogenous crime measure
included in the hedonic price model, it is unlikely to satisfy the other conditions required
of a valid instrument. First, the murder rate may have its own direct effect on house value
and therefore should not be excluded from the hedonic model. Second, undesirable
neighborhood characteristics (e.g., the presence of crack houses) are likely to be
correlated with both housing prices and the murder rate. As is generally true with the
other studies utilizing instrumental variables to estimate the cost of crime, the ad hoc
nature of Tita et al.'s instrumentation makes it difficult to interpret their results.

Having provided a critical review of the extant literature relating house value to
neighborhood crime, we next provide some new evidence that addresses the limitations
that we have identified in previous studies.
Data

Our panel data set is constructed from two sources ­ the Miami-Dade property tax rolls
obtained from the Florida Department of Revenue (FDOR) and a database of crime
incident reports maintained by the Miami-Dade County Sheriff's Office. These data
sources and how we used them to construct our panel are described below.

Florida statutes require that each county annually submits its property tax roll in a
standardized format to FDOR for auditing purposes. These rolls span the years 1995 to
2007. Among the items included on the rolls is a detailed code indicating the current land
use of each parcel, the interior usable space for improved properties, and the price and
date of sale for the two most recent property transfers. Additionally, three fields in the
FDOR rolls indicate the township, range, and section (TRS) from the Public Land Survey
System (PLSS) within which the parcel is situated.10 The TRS can be used to place each
parcel within a one-mile by one-mile square.

Our goal is to investigate the impact of crime on property value at the neighborhood
level. Census tracts are the most common geographical areas used to represent urban
neighborhoods. The U.S. Census Bureau defines a census tract as a homogenous area in
regards to the characteristics of the population, their economic status, and their living
conditions. A tract generally has between 2500 and 8000 residents. Because the FDOR
tax rolls report only PLSS and not Census geography, we cannot assign parcels to census
tracts.11 However, we can approximate the Census geography using the TRS squares. To
generate this approximation, we first determine the census tract within which the centroid
of each TRS is contained using Geographic Information Systems technology.12 The
result of this process is a TRS-tract crosswalk that can be used to assign parcels from any
tax roll to tract-like areas. Our neighborhoods can be interpreted as the best
approximation to census tract geography using one-mile by one-mile squares.13

After using the TRS-tract crosswalk to assign each parcel to a tract, we then construct a
number of variables to be used in our empirical model. One set of variables captures
inter-neighborhood and intertemporal differences in commercial land use composition.
More specifically, for each of 25 different commercial land use classifications, we
construct two variables: a count variable measuring the total number of parcels of that
land use type within the tract and a continuous variable measuring the total amount of
interior square footage of that land use type within the tract. It is from these commercial
land use variables that we construct our instrumental variables.

Another variable we construct for each tract/year record is a constant-quality house price
index value. This value is obtained by using the information on the two most recent sales
transactions to estimate standard repeat sales models separately for each tract:

 lni,t           k   D  i,k  i ,t ,t n                                (1)
i ,t n      k 1

where Pi,t is the most recent selling price of property i at time t;
Pi,t-n is the previous selling price of property i at time t-n;
k is the logarithm of the cumulative price index in period t;
Di,k is a dummy variable which equals -1 at the time of the initial sale, +1 at the time of
the second sale, and 0 otherwise; and
i,t,t-n is the regression error term.
If t denotes the estimate of the year t coefficient, the price index value for year t (It)
equals exp (t)*100.

Our other source of data is the crime incidence reports provided by the Miami-Dade
County Sheriff's Office. This database, which contains information on more than 2
million crimes occurring between 1999 and 2007, identifies the date, time, and type (e.g.,
burglary, robbery) of each crime reported in unincorporated Miami-Dade County and the
municipalities of Miami Gardens, Miami Lakes, Doral, Palmetto Bay and Cutler Bay. As
of 2007, this collection of six jurisdictions had a total population of 1.3 million people,
which amounts to roughly 54 per cent of the total population of Miami-Dade County. The
most unique aspect of the crime database is that it contains the exact location at which the
crime was committed. This enabled us to assign crimes to tracts in the same way we
assigned homes to tracts, as described above. Crimes are broken down into their two
major categories: violent crime (homicide, aggravated assault and robbery) and property
crime (burglary, motor theft and larceny).14

In the literature that has investigated the effect of crime on property values, crime has
been measured at the neighborhood level in three different ways (see Table 1): number of
crimes versus number of crimes per resident versus number of crimes per acre (or other
spatial unit). The latter two measures are commonly referred to as the crime rate and the
crime density, respectively. Of the three alternative measures, the crime rate has been the
most popular measure, presumably because it best registers the individual resident's risk
of victimization. Criminologists have argued, however, that at the neighborhood level (in
comparison to the city level, which is the level at which crime rates are reported by the
FBI) the crime rate is a less reliable measure of residents' probability of being victimized
because crime is higher where business activity is greater and the latter activity varies
greatly across census tracts.15 Moreover, Bowes and Ihlanfeldt (2001) have argued that
crime density may be more highly correlated with the average resident's knowledge of
crimes committed in his neighborhood. Crime density may also be a better measure of
neighborhood crime than the crime rate if people wish to avoid exposure to crime. The
latter equals the probability of being either a victim of crime or a witness to a crime. This
probability is better measured by the number of crimes in a unit of space than by the
number of crimes per resident. All three alternative crime measures are included in our
panel so that we can experiment with each one in estimating our models.

Our panel includes nine years of data for 130 tracts, yielding a total of 1170 tract/year
observations. As described below, we first difference the data and allow for distributed
lagged effects going back four years. This leaves us with 520 observations. For 18 of
these observations a house price index value could not be computed due to an insufficient
number of sales transactions, resulting in a final sample size of 502 observations.

Models used to estimate the housing price-crime relationship
To estimate the effect of crime on housing price, we first difference the data and regress
the change in the housing price index on changes in crime. Focusing on housing price
changes rather than levels helps mitigate possible bias resulting from each of the sources
of the endogeneity of crime identified above. For example, crime may be worse in
neighborhoods with lower housing prices because criminals are more likely to live in
these neighborhoods and, as noted above, criminals tend to commit their crimes close to
where they live. Criminals may also be more likely to live in neighborhoods experiencing
less price appreciation. To the extent that this relationship between the location of
criminals and neighborhood affluence is time-invariant, the standard first differences
estimator provides consistent estimates of the effect of crime on housing prices, in the
presence of arbitrary correlation between the regressors and that portion of the composite
error term that is constant within the tract.16 Similar arguments can be made in favor of
first differencing the data for the other four sources of crime endogeneity.

Another advantage from first differencing the data is that multicollinearity among the
variables measuring each type of crime is substantially reduced. Table 2 presents
correlation coefficients between property and violent crime, in both levels and changes,
using as the crime measure the number of crimes per acre within the tract.17 Levels of
crime density are highly collinear, with a correlation coefficient of .71. In contrast, the
correlation between changes in violent and property crime density is only .22.

The basic model we estimate to investigate the effect of crime on housing price can be
expressed as:
JH

   i,t   t    j,th Ci, j,th   i,t       (2)

j1 h0

where it is the change in the repeat sales price index in tract i between year t and year t-

1;  t are time fixed effects (i.e., year dummy variables); and j represents the two different

types of crime (property and violent).

For each type of crime, we include the current change (Ct - Ct-1) and four lags (Ct-1 - Ct-2,
Ct-2 - Ct-3, Ct-3 - Ct-4, Ct-4 - Ct-5). The expectation is that the full impact of a spike in crime
on housing price will occur with a lag. First, it takes time for new information regarding
the safety of a neighborhood to be fully assimilated by market participants. Second,
current changes in housing prices reflect to some extent prices agreed upon before the
increase in crime occurred, given that the price is recorded at the time of closing and
considerable time may expire between when an agreement is reached and the date of
closing.

The two most widely-used panel data estimators, the first difference estimator and the
fixed effects estimator, are consistent under the assumption of strict exogeneity, which
rules out any correlation between the regressors and the error term in any time period,
current, future or past (Wooldridge 2002, p. 254). An important implication of strict
exogeneity is that current values of the dependent variable cannot affect current or future
values of the explanatory variables. For example, if an increase in t causes an increase
in Ct+2, strict exogeneity is violated. Thus, although the first difference estimator is
consistent in the presence of correlation between reported criminal activity and the tract-
specific fixed effect, the first difference estimator will generally be inconsistent if our
crime variables are correlated with that portion of the composite error term that varies
over time.

While strict exogeneity may or may not hold for violent crime, it is unlikely to hold for
property crime. Criminals in search of valuable goods to steal are likely attracted to
neighborhoods with rising housing values. In this case, the increase in price in period t
will raise property crimes in t or more likely t+µ, resulting in a violation of strict
exogeneity.

The solution to the strict exogeneity problem is to instrument Ct and possibly Ct-1,
depending on one's assumptions. Under the assumption of sequential exogeneity, there is
no contemporaneous feedback and It is allowed to affect only future changes in crime
(Ct+1, Ct+2, ...). In this case, only Ct requires instrumentation. However, if we allow
for the crime levels to be correlated with contemporaneous as well as past values of the
error term, then both Ct and Ct-1 must be instrumented. It is reasonable to assume
sequential exogeneity, because it seems unlikely that criminals would react to changing
neighborhood housing values without some delay. Just like home buyers in their response
to changing neighborhood crime levels, it takes time for criminals to obtain and
assimilate new information regarding neighborhood crime opportunities and change their
behavior accordingly. Nevertheless, we estimate (2) instrumenting just Ct, but also run
regressions where both Ct and Ct-1 are instrumented.
In most cases, when using panel data the choice of instruments is an easy one. Lagged
levels of the endogenous change variables typically make good instruments because
levels and changes are correlated and the lagged values are generally assumed to be
exogenous. But this strategy will not work in our case, because lagged changes in crime
enter our model as explanatory variables.18 Another challenge that instrumentation poses
for our model is that there are four variables (two crime types, with Ct and Ct-1
endogenous) that must be instrumented, if the assumption of sequential exogeneity is not
made.

Our instrumentation strategy involves using our data on the commercial land uses that
exist within each tract. Recall that there are 25 different commercial land use categories,
and for each one we know the number of establishments and the total square footage
within the tract. We first difference these data and alternatively use lagged changes in the
number of establishments and in the total square feet of interior usable space as
instruments. In each case there are 25 instrumental variables ­ one for each land use
category.

The logic underlying our choice of instruments is that the criminal's opportunity set
depends on the commercial land uses that exist within the tract. Some land uses are
excellent targets for some types of crime, while other land uses favor other types of
crime. For example, a new convenience store provides an opportunity to commit a
robbery (a violent crime), while more offices create more locations that can be
burglarized (a property crime). Hence, we expect that changes in particular types of crime
are correlated with past changes in particular commercial land uses.

A concern regarding our instruments is that the commercial activity within a
neighborhood may have positive or negative direct effects on nearby property values.
Negative effects are possible if some types of commercial land use generate traffic, noise
or other negative externalities. Positive effects are possible if commercial activity
provides convenience for shopping or entertainment. However, these effects, whether
positive or negative, are likely to be the result of differences in average levels of overall
commercial activity rather than marginal changes within individual land use categories.
For example, homes may sell for more in neighborhoods that offer more total shopping
opportunities, but another shoe store is not likely to alter the attractiveness of the
neighborhood.

In short, our argument is that a marginal change in a single commercial land use category
will affect the opportunity landscape for criminal activity but will not affect the
attractiveness of the neighborhood (apart from the effect that the change in land use has
on attractiveness through its effect on crime). One way to bolster our argument is to
purge from our set of instruments those land use categories that include shopping, eating
and drinking establishments. If marginal changes do matter, they would seem to matter
more for these particular land uses, resulting in important changes in our results. As
reported below, paring down our list of instruments in this way has little effect on our
results.
Ultimately, the validity of our instrumentation strategy rests upon the performance of the
instruments. Specifically, are they highly correlated with the endogenous variables? Are
they correctly excluded from the price equation? Are they uncorrelated with the error
term of the price equation? As reported below, statistical tests directed at answering these
questions support our chosen instruments.

Spatial variation in neighborhood crime

Before discussing the results from estimating the house price models, the substantial
variation in crime across neighborhoods is shown with the data. First, the average number
of crimes per acre and the average number of crimes per 1000 persons were computed for
each tract over the nine years that make up our panel. This statistic can be interpreted as
the average reported criminal activity in the tract over the duration of the panel. Next, the
mean of these averages was computed for each quintile in the crime distribution, where
the bottom quintile is the 20 per cent of tracts with the lowest crime densities (rates) and
the top quintile is the 20 per cent of tracts with the highest crime densities (rates). These
means are reported in Table 3 for total crime, violent crime and property crime.19

The mean number of total indexed crimes per acre (per 1000 population) is 13 (6) times
greater in quintile 5 than in quintile 1. Substantial variation in crime is also found for
each of the two categories of crime. This is especially true for the violent crimes. For
example, the average number of violent crimes per acre in the fifth quintile is 32 times
greater than the density of violent crimes in the first quintile.

We also computed the average annual change in the crime density and in the crime rate
over the panel for each tract. The means of these averages, again broken down by
quintiles, are also reported in Table 3. Once again, there is considerable variation across
quintiles, regardless of the type of crime. In the lower quintiles, the mean changes are all
negative, indicating that, within these tracts, crime tends to fall from one year to the next.
In contrast, within the fifth quintile the mean change is always positive, and in most cases
this is true within the fourth quintile, as well.

Besides the crime quintiles, at the bottom of Table 3 we report means by quintiles for
household income and the rate of house price appreciation, the latter measured over the
last four years of the panel, 2004 to 2007. The income quintiles show that the
neighborhoods in our sample differ widely in income. In the 20 per cent of tracts with the
highest incomes, mean income is more than twice as high as in the 20 per cent of tracts
with the lowest incomes. Similarly, there is variation in house price appreciation, with
prices rising more than twice as fast in the top appreciation quintile in comparison to the
bottom appreciation quintile.

Finally, instead of using their own quintiles, we report mean household income and the
mean appreciation percentage within the violent crime and property crime density
quintiles. As expected, average household income is lowest in the top violent crime
quintile and highest in the bottom violent crime quintile. In the case of property crime,
while household income is again the lowest in the top crime quintile, it is highest in the
second quintile. What may appear surprising is that house price appreciation is highest
within the highest crime quintile, for both violent and property crime. This seeming
anomaly is explained by the tendency of lower priced homes to appreciate at a more rapid
rate than higher priced homes within Miami-Dade County over the specified time period
(2004-2007).

Which measure of crime is best?

In this section we present the results from estimating OLS versions of (2), using the three
alternative measures of crime: the number of crimes, the crime rate and the crime density.
These regressions are run to determine which measure performs best in explaining
neighborhood housing prices.

Of the three measures, changes in crime density explain the greatest variation in the
change in the price index (see Table 4). The crime rate, which has been the most used
measure of neighborhood crime, performs the worst. These results are consistent with
those obtained by Bowes and Ihlanfeldt (2001), who also find that crime density
outperforms the crime rate in explaining inter-neighborhood variation in housing prices.
A number of arguments were made above for why density turns out to be the preferred
measure of crime. In light of the findings presented in Table 4, we estimate our 2SLS
models using crime density as our measure of neighborhood crime.
The OLS crime density results (Column 3 of Table 4) show that none of the changes in
property crime has a statistically significant effect on the change in the house price index.
In contrast, three of the violent crime changes (t-2, t-3 and t-4) are significant with
negative signs.

Strict exogeneity tests

Our strict exogeneity tests are those suggested by Wooldridge (2002). They involve
adding to (2) crime levels measured for different time periods. If strict exogeneity is
satisfied, crime levels for the current or any future or past period of the nine year panel
should not be statistically significant. There are two restrictions on our choice of level
variables to include in (2): 1) if we wish to maintain our sample size, future levels (t + )
cannot both be included and 2) because we use lagged changes in crime as explanatory
variables, level variables from any two consecutive periods (e.g., t and t-1) cannot be
included. In light of these restrictions we include Ct for each type of crime separately and
together. We repeat these estimated regressions using Ct-1 in place of Ct. In all cases (see
Table 5), the results show that levels of both violent crime and property crime are
statistically significant, indicating that neither type of crime is strictly exogenous. This
implies that (2) should be estimated by 2SLS, with both changes in violent and property
crime requiring instrumentation.

Results from estimating the house price index models
Estimates of (2) using 2SLS are reported in Table 6. Column 1 presents the results from
instrumenting Ct for violent and property crime. Recall that this estimation strategy
assumes sequential exogeneity. Dropping this assumption, Column 2 presents the results
from instrumenting both Ct and Ct-1 for both crime categories.

Two different but related instrumental variable sets are available. One set uses lagged
changes in the interior usable square footage of individual commercial land use
categories as instruments. The other uses lagged changes in the number of establishments
falling within these categories.

To determine which IV set to employ, as well as the lag length of the variables, we
experimented with both sets and possible lags. The IV set based on changes in interior
space and a two-year lag was found to yield the highest joint F-statistics in the first-stage
regressions of the 2SLS models.20 These variables also convincingly passed Hansen's J-
statistic test (see bottom of Table 6). This is a test of the joint hypothesis that the
instrumental variables are uncorrelated with the error term and correctly excluded from
the estimated change in house price index equation.

When instrumenting just Ct (Column 1) none of the property crime variables is
statistically significant. Of the violent crime variables,. the t and t-1 change variables are
not significant, but the t-2, t-3 and t-4 changes are all highly significant with a negative
sign. The timing pattern revealed by these results suggests, for example, that an increase
in the density of violent crime in 2004 (above that reported in 2003) would first lower
neighborhood housing prices in 2006 (relative to their values in 2005). Summing up the
estimated coefficients on the significant violent crime variables yields an estimate of the
Long Run Propensity (LRP). The LRP represents the change in the house price index that
would occur within the neighborhood if there was a permanent increase in the crime
measure. The LRP and its p-value are reported at the bottom of Table 6. The estimated
LRP for violent crime is -1177, with a p-value equal to .000. We also use the estimated
LRP to calculate an elasticity of house value with respect to crime, evaluated at the point
of means. This elasticity is -.238, indicating that a 10 per cent increase in the violent
crime density within a neighborhood reduces house values by 2.4 per cent.

The results presented in Column 2 of Table 6 are those obtained from instrumenting both
Ct and Ct-1. One of the property crime variables, the t-1 change, is negative and
significant, but only at the 10 per cent level. Among the violent crime variables, the t-3
and t-4 change variables are negative and highly significant. The implied violent crime
LRP is -1020 (p-value=.000) and the implied elasticity is -.206. Hence the violent crime
results from instrumenting both Ct and Ct-1 are quite similar to those obtained from
instrumenting just Ct.21

While the tests of strict exogeneity indicated the need to instrument both violent and
property crime, the 2SLS results presented in Table 6 are quite similar to the OLS results
presented in Table 4. Both sets of results yield the same conclusion; namely, that violent
crime, but not property crime, affects what home buyers are willing to pay for housing in
different neighborhoods.

A possible limitation of the results presented in Table 6 (and Table 4) is that they are
generated from an equation that includes only year dummies as control variables.
Omitted variable bias may result if there are variables, other than the crime variables, that
are changing over time within tracts that are both correlated with crime and have their
own direct effect on neighborhood housing price. We took two approaches to address this
issue. First, we added to the model current and lagged changes in three variables: the total
interior square footage of commercial space within the tract, the total interior square
footage of industrial space within the tract, and the total interior space of multi-family
housing within the tract. Only the LRP for multi-family housing is statistically
significant, with a positive sign. Apparently, the multi-family variables capture changes
in the attractiveness of the neighborhood that are not accounted for if only the crime and
year variables are included in the model. However, the inclusion of the multi-family
variables had little effect on the estimated crime LRPs. The results continue to show, with
the same consistency across specifications, that violent crime is the only type of crime
that matters to neighborhood housing price.

The other approach we took to investigate the possibility of omitted variable bias
involved using our instrumental variables. If the crime variables are correlated with the
error term as the result of omitted variables, unbiased estimates can be obtained by
instrumenting the crime variables. As noted above, in the specification that does not
assume sequential exogeneity, we are instrumenting Ct and Ct-1 for both types of
crime. But omitted variables may bias the estimated coefficients on the other crime
variables (Ct-2, Ct-3, and Ct-4).

We therefore instrumented all ten crime variables entering (2) (Ct, Ct-1, Ct-2, Ct-3,
Ct-4 for both categories of crime). For this model the instrumental variable set based on
changes in the number of establishments within each commercial land use category,
lagged four years, best satisfied our IV validation tests. For all ten endogenous variables
the first-stage F-statistics are significant at the 1 per cent level and the exogeneity of the
instrumental variables could not be rejected based on Hansen's J-statistic. However,
simultaneously treating all ten crime variables as endogenous clearly stretches what can
meaningfully be done with our data. These results should therefore be interpreted with an
appropriate degree of caution.

The results are reported in Column 3 of Table 6. Once again, none of the property crime
variables is significant. Of the violent crime variables, the t-3 and t-4 changes are
significant, mirroring the results presented in Column 2, where Ct and Ct-1 are
instrumented . instrumented. The results are therefore consistent with the OLS and other
2SLS results, which point to violent crime as the type of crime that matters to property
values. However, the estimated LRP (-3104) and elasticity (-.627) are substantially larger
than those suggested by the previous results.

Conclusion
In this chapter we first reviewed the extensive literature that has related crime to housing
values. We found that the most remarkable feature of this literature is that the vast
majority of studies treat crime as an exogenous variable in estimated hedonic models. Of
the minority of studies that endogenize crime, each study either uses a questionable
instrumentation strategy or suffers from other possible specification errors.

In an attempt to deal with the endogeneity of crime and avoid other methodological
weaknesses found in previous studies, we utilize a nine-year panel of crime for Miami-
Dade County at the neighborhood level. Using state-of-the-art panel data estimation
techniques we find that home buyers are willing to pay nontrivial premiums for housing
located in neighborhoods with less violent crime. Our most reliable estimates suggest that
the elasticity of house value with respect to the neighborhood density of violent crime is
roughly equal to -.25. We find no evidence that property crime has an impact on housing
prices.

The unimportance of property crime may reflect the fact that such crimes cause far less
psychic harm to victims in comparison to violent crime. Moreover, self-protection
measures are more effective in deterring property crimes. In particular, alarm systems can
effectively protect residents from both burglary and auto theft.22 In comparison, there are
a limited number of options that can offer protection against most acts of violence. The
best option may be to self-select peaceful living environments, which our results suggest
is an option that many households adopt.
                                                Table 1
                                   Crime/Property Value Studies

Author(s) and  City       Year(s)  Data             Crime          Instruments  Validation of Findings
Date of        St. Louis  1960                                                  Instruments
Publication                                         Variables
Ridker and
Henning                            Median           Crime rate     None         None  Crime rate not
1967                               owner-                          None               significant.
                                   estimated        Crime rate of  None
Kain and       St. Louis  1967     house value      Pauley block                None  Crime rate not
Quigley                            for 167 tracts;                              None  significant for
1970                               total indexed    Various crime                     renters or
                                   crimes by        rates                             owners.
Gray and       Minneapolis 1970    police district
Joelson                            579 rent                                           Out of eight
1977                               values, 275                                        types of crime
                                   owner-                                             only vandalism
                                   estimated                                          and burglary
                                   values; crime                                      are significant:
                                   rate of Pauley                                     1% increase in
                                   block                                              burglary
                                   Median                                             caused $336
                                   owner-                                             decline in
                                   estimated                                          house value,
                                   house value
                                   for census
                                   tracts; eight
                                   different types
                                   of crime by
                                   tract
Thaler       Rochester  1971       398 home         Property        None            None  1% increase in
1978                    1972-1974  values;          crime rate of                         vandalism
                        1968-1972  property         tract                                 caused $117
                                   crimes for                                             decrease in
                                   census tracts                                          house value.
                                                                                          Standard
Hellman and  Boston                Median           Crime rate of   None            None  deviation
Naroff                             owner-           tract                           None  increase in
1979                               estimated                        Crime is              property crime
                                   house value in   For block and   instrumental          reduces house
Rizzo        Chicago               147 census       individual      in only the           value by 3%.
1979                               tracts; index    sales           regression run        Elasticity of
                                   crimes per       regressions:    for the 71            house value
                                   tract            total crime     neighborhood          with respect to
                                   1970 median      rate, property  communities,          crime rate =
                                   rent for 111     crime rate,     instruments =         -.63.
                                   blocks; 1970     violent crime   the proportion
                                   median           rate of block;  of population         Generally, all
                                   owner-           for 71          15-24, median         crime variables
                                   estimated        neighborhood    years of              have negative
                                   value for 68     communities,                          and significant
                                   blocks; 324                                            effects across
                                   single-family                                          the alternative
                                   sales; for                                             data bases. For
                                   above three                                            the data base
                                   data sets total                                        where crime is
                                                                                          instrumented,
                                                                                          estimated
                                                                                          crime
Naroff,    Boston     1970  crime, violent   total crime     schooling,        None  coefficients are
Hellman,                    crime,           rate of police  unemployment      None  much larger
Skinner                     property crime   district        rate,                   than those
1980                        by block;                        population              obtained with
                            median           Crime rate of   density,                OLS.
Dubin and  Baltimore  1978  owner-           tract           proportion of
Goodman                     estimated                        population on           Elasticity of
1982                        house value      Principal       welfare, males          house value
                            for 71           components      to females,             with respect to
                            neighborhood     for non-        and labor               crime rate =
                            communities;     violent         force                   -1.67.
                            for the latter   property crime  participation
                            data, the 71                     rate                    Unit increase
                            communities                                              in C1, C2 and
                            are assigned                     Population              C3 reduces
                            total crimes                     density of tract        house value by
                            reported for                                             $795, $3143
                            21 police                        None
                            districts
                            Median
                            owner-
                            estimated
                            house value
                            for census
                            tracts; total
                            crimes of tract
                            1765 single-
                            family sales;
                            12 different
                            types of crime
                            for crime
Burnell    Chicago          1980       reporting        (C1), violent    Community        None          and $3721,
1988       suburban                    areas            crime (C2)       fiscal &                       respectively.
           communities                                  and shopping     demographic      None
                                       Median           center crime     characteristics                Elasticity of
Clark and  Multiple         1979       owner-           (C3)                              Failed over-  house value
Cosgrove   metropolitan                estimated        Property         None             ID test       with respect to
1990       areas                       value for 71     crime rate                                      property crime
                                       communities;                      Lags of          None          rate = -.10.
Buck, Hakim, Atlantic City  1972-1986  property crime   Murder rate      explanatory
                                       for each         estimated for    variables                      Elasticity of
Spiegel    region                      community        each house as                                   house value
                                       596 owner-       a function of    None                           with respect to
1993                                   estimated        distance of                                     murder rate =
                                       home values      house from                                      -.125.
Taylor     Baltimore        1980       from Public      CBD
1995                                   Use Micro-       Larceny, auto                                   Highly mixed,
                                       data Sample      theft, burglary                                 with no
                                                        crime rate of                                   consistent
                                       Total assessed   community                                       finding across
                                       value for 64                                                     alternative
                                       communities;     1970 assault                                    model
                                       larceny, auto    rate,  assault                                  specifications.
                                       theft, burglary  rate,  murder
                                       crimes for                                                        assault rate
                                       each                                                             and  murder
                                       community                                                        rate negative,
                                       Median
                                       owner-
                                       estimated
                                        house value rate                              significant
                                        for 223 census                                effect on 
                                        tracts; assault                               value, level of
                                        and murder                                    assault rate
                                        rates by tract                                positive,
                                                                                      significant
Case and      Eastern        1982-1992  Repeat sales     Crime rate of    None  None  effect.
Mayer                                   price index for  town             None  None  Crime rate has
1996          Massachusetts             168 towns;                        None  None  positive effect
                                        total crimes     Density of                   on house price.
Bowes and     towns                     per town         total crimes in        None
Ihlanfeldt                              22 388 single-   tract                        Unit increase
2001          Atlanta        1991-1994  family sales;                                 in crime
                                        index crimes     Cost of violent              density reduces
Lynch and     Jacksonville 1994-1995    for census       crime, cost of               house value by
Rasmussen                               tracts           property crime               3 to 6 %.
2001                                    2800 single-                                  Only houses in
                                        family sales;                                 top two cost of
                                        index crimes                                  crime deciles
                                        for 89 police                                 suffer
                                        beats                                         nontrivial loss
                                                                                      in value from
Schwartz,     New York       1975-1998  Repeat sales     Violent crime None           crime.
Susin, Voicu                            for 25 947       rate, property               Only violent
2003                                    sales pairs;     crime rate                   crime rate is
                                        crimes for 75                                 significant,
                                        police                                        unit increase in
                                        precincts                                     violent crime
                                                                                      rate reduces
                                                                                      house value by
Gibbons        London    1999-2001  10 464           Burglaries /    Commercial Yes     .12%.
2004                                individual       kilometers,     crime              A one-tenth
                                    single-family    vandalism /     densities,         standard
                                    sales;           kilometers      distance to        deviation
                                    burglaries,                      nearest public     decrease in the
                                    vandalism                        house or wine      local density of
                                    crimes for 100                   bar                vandalism
                                    meter grid                                          crime adds 1%
                                                                                        to house price;
Tita, Petras,  Columbus  1995-1998  43 000 single-   Total crime     Murder rate  None  burglary crime
Greenbaum                           family sales;    rate, violent                      rate not
2006                                index crimes     crime rate,                        significant.
                                    by census tract  property crime                     Crime is
                                                     rate (entered                      capitalized into
                                                     in levels and                      house price at
                                                     changes);                          different rates
                                                     separate                           for poor,
                                                     regressions                        middle, and
                                                     run for each                       wealthy
                                                     type of crime                      neighborhoods,
                                                                                        with violent
                                                                                        crime most
                                                                                        important.
                                           Table 2
Correlation Coefficients ­ Levels and Changes in Neighborhood Crime Density

Violent    Violent  Property   Violent
Property                         .22
 Violent     .71      -.04
 Property    .06       .04
             .01
                                                   Table 3
                  Neighborhood Characteristics (Means of Nine-Year Averages)

                      Mean                   Means by Quintile

                      .465    (1)    (2)     (3)                (4)            (5)
                      -.006
Total crime a         66.9   .074    .269    .411               .603          .952
   Density             -1.5  -.049   -.019   -.007              -.000         .008
    Density                  22.9    39.7    54.2               78.8          136.4
   Rate               .063   -6.6    -2.0     -.8                              1.9
    Rate              -.002                                       .0
                       8.8   .006                                             .189
Violent crime b        -.2   -.008   .018    .034               .065          .002
   Density                    1.6                                             25.8
    Density           .406   -1.1    -.002   -.000              .000            .3
   Rate               -.011
    Rate              58.6   .070    2.9     4.5                8.9           .788
                       -1.3  -.041                                            .008
Property crime c             21.4    -.2     -.1                .0            115.6
   Density                   -5.6                                              1.9
    Density                          .253    .376               .533
   Rate                              -.018   -.006              -.000
    Rate                             36.5    48.4               68.7
                                     -2.0     -.8
                                                                  .2

Household income 53 288      35 360  45 027  51 587             57 742        75 433
%  Index 2004-07 37.2         23.0    32.1    36.4               42.4          51.7

For violent crime d          64 504  60 242  54 141             49 944        40 347
   Income                     33.9    32.1    33.3               38.2          47.2
   %  Index

For property crime e         58 700  60 816  53 725             50 112        42 748
   Income                     35.1    33.4    35.9               37.3          43.2
   %  Index

a Total crime = murder + aggravated assault + robbery + burglary + motor theft + larceny.
b Violent crime = murder + aggravated assault + robbery.
c Property crime = burglary + motor theft + larceny.
d The quintile means reported are for the violent crime density quintiles.
e The quintile means reported are for the property crime density quintiles.
                                                Table 4
          OLS Estimates of Alternative Measures of Crime on House Price Index

 Violent      Crime a   Crime Rate b  Crime Density c
   t
   t-1         -.050        -.401            -19
   t-2        (.707) d      (.661)          (.896)
   t-3         -.119       -1.200           -139
   t-4        (.350)        (.138)          (.279)
               -.275       -2.004           -255
 Property     (.007)        (.000)          (.002)
   t           -.664       -3.797           -506
   t-1        (.000)        (.000)          (.000)
   t-2                     -3.233           -413
   t-3         -559         (.000)          (.000)
   t-4        (.000)
                             .113             33
               .018         (.578)          (.237)
              (.515)         .257
               .024         (.173)            36
              (.353)         .108           (.131)
               .012         (.459)
              (.563)         .118             23
               .010         (.567)          (.293)
              (.629)         .111
               .014         (.491)            29
              (.501)                        (.232)

                                              22
                                            (.335)

R-square      .317      .312          .324

Observations  502       502           502

a Number of crimes in tract
b Crime rate in tract = (#crimes in tract / population of tract) * 1000
c Crime density in tract = #crimes in tract / land area of tract in acres
d P-values in parentheses. These values are based on standard errors that are robust to

heteroskedasticity and serial correlation.
                                       Table 5
                              Strict Exogeneity Tests

                                    (P-values) *

                   (1)   (2)   (3)                     (4)  (5)   (6)

Property crime

t                  .001                                     .027

t-1                      .001                                     .027

Violent crime

t                              .000                         .000

t-1                                  .000                         .000

Joint F-statistic                                           .000  .000

     * P-values are based on standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity and serial correlation.
                                               Table 6
                      Estimates of Crime Density on House Price Index

                                    Two-Stage Least Squares

 Violent               (1) a    (2) b                                   (3) c
   t
   t-1                 -139      413                                    766
   t-2                (.780) d  (.354)                                 (.421)
   t-3                           915                                   -678
   t-4                 -190     (.059)                                 (.388)
                      (.321)                                           -518
 Property              -281      -17                                   (.603)
   t                  (.004)    (.924)                                 -1488
   t-1                 -511     -547                                   (.060)
   t-2                (.000)    (.000)                                 -1615
   t-3                 -385     -473                                   (.013)
   t-4                (.001)    (.002)
                                                                       -109
                         85      121                                   (.568)
                      (.288)    (.126)                                  247
                                -106                                   (.325)
                         55     (.084)                                  353
                      (.124)                                           (.328)
                                 -58                                    258
                         26     (.161)                                 (.219)
                      (.287)
                                 -34                                     3
                         30     (.271)                                 (.982)
                      (.245)
                                  -8                                   -3104
                         16     (.780)                                 (.019)
                      (.516)                                           -.627
                                                                       20.5
Violent, LRP e        -1177     -1020                                  (.306)
                      (.000)    (.000)
Elasticity f          -.238     -.206
Hansen's J-statistic   20.4     12.8
                      (.674)    (.937)

Observations          502       502                                    502

a  Violent crime density (t) and  Property crime density (t) are instrumented.
b  Violent crime density (t, t-1) and  Property crime density (t, t-1) are instrumented.
c  Violent crime density (t, t-1, t-2, t-3, t-4) and  Property crime density (t, t-1, t-2, t-3,

t-4) are instrumented.
d P-values in parentheses. These values are based on standard errors that are robust to

heteroskedasticity and serial correlation.
e LRP = long run propensity = sum of estimated violent crime coefficients that are

statistically significant.
f Elasticity estimated at point of means.
                                               References

Bowes, David R. and Keith R. Ihlanfeldt (2001), `Identifying the impacts of rail transit
stations on residential property values', Journal of Urban Economics 50, 1-25.

Buck, Andrew and Simon Hakim (1989), `Does crime affect property values?', The
Canadian Appraiser 33 (4), 23-27.

Buck, Andrew J., Simon Hakim and Uriel Spiegel (1993), `Endogenous crime
victimization, taxes, and property values', Social Science Quarterly 74 (2), 334-348.

Burnell, James D. (1988), `Crime and racial composition in contiguous communities as
negative externalities', American Journal of Economics and Sociology 47 (2), 176-193.

Case, Karl E. and Christopher J. Mayer (1996), `Housing price dynamics within a
metropolitan area', Regional Science and Urban Economics 26, 387-407.

Cohen, M.A., T.R. Miller and B. Wiersema (1995), Crime in the United States: Victim
Costs and Consequences, Final Report to the National Institute of Justice.
Dubin, Robin A. and Allen C. Goodman (1982), `Valuation of education and crime
neighborhood characteristics through hedonic housing prices', Population and
Environment 5 (3), 166-181.

Eide, Erling (1994), Economics of Crime: Deterrence and the Rational Offender, New
York: North-Holland.

Gibbons, Steve (2004), `The costs of urban property crime', The Economic Journal 114,
441-452.

Gray, Charles and Mitchell R. Joelson (1979), `Neighborhood crime and the demand for
central city housing', in C.M. Gray (ed.), The Costs of Crime, Beverly Hills, CA: Sage,
pp. 47-60.

Hellman, Daryl A. and Joel L. Naroff (1979), `The impact of crime on urban residential
property values', Urban Studies 16, 105-112.

Kain, John F. and John M. Quigley (1970). `Measuring the value of housing quality',
Journal of the American Statistical Association 65, 532-547.

Leven, Charles L. and Jonathan H. Mark (1977), `Revealed preferences for neighborhood
characteristics', Urban Studies 14, 147-159.
Lynch, Allen K. and David W. Rasmussen (2001), `Measuring the impact of crime on
house prices', Applied Economics 33, 1981-1989.

Naroff, Joel L., Daryl Hellman and David Skinner (1980), `Estimates of the impact of
crime on property values', Growth and Change 11 (4), 24-30.

Pope, C.E. (1980), `Patterns in burglary: An empirical examination of offense and
offender characteristics', Journal of Criminal Justice 8, 39-51.

Reppetto, Thomas A. (1974), Residential Crime, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.

Ridker, Ronald G. and John A. Henning (1967), `The determinants of residential property
values with special reference to air pollution', Review of Economics and Statistics 49,
246-257.

Rizzo, Mario J. (1979), `The cost of crime to victims: An empirical analysis', Journal of
Legal Studies 8,177-205.

Schwartz, Amy Ellen, Scott Susin and Ioan Voicu (2003), `Has falling crime driven New
York City's real estate boom?', Journal of Housing Research 14 (1), 101-135.
Skogan, Wesley G. (1999), `Measuring what matters: Crime, disorder, and fear', in
Robert H. Langworthy (ed.), Measuring What Matters: Proceedings From the Policing
Research Institute Meetings, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, pp. 37-53.

Stock, James H. and Motohiro Yogo (2005), `Testing for Weak Instruments
in Linear IV Regression', in Donald W. K. Andrews and James H. Stock (eds),
Identification and Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas
Rothenberg, New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, pp. 80-108.

Taylor, Ralph B. (1995), `The impact of crime on communities', Annals of the American
Academy of Political and Social Science 539, 28-45.

Thaler, Richard (1978), `A note on the value of crime control: Evidence from the
property market', Journal of Urban Economics 5, 137-145.

Tita, George E., Tricia L. Petras and Robert T. Greenbaum (2006), `Crime and residential
choice: A neighborhood level analysis of the impact of crime on housing prices', Journal
of Quantitative Criminology 22: 299-317.

1 Expenditure data from the Florida Department of Financial Services indicates that in 2006, Miami-Dade
County, the subject of our empirical investigation, spent over $540 million on law enforcement. This figure
constituted over 15 per cent of all county expenditures in this fiscal year.
2 Our definition of property crime is identical to the definition employed by the FBI and includes the crimes
of burglary, motor theft and larceny. The FBI defines violent crime as murder, rape, robbery and
aggravated assault. To protect the identity of victims of rape, the addresses of rape crimes are not reported
and therefore could not be assigned to census tracts. Hence we define violent crime as murder, robbery and
aggravated assault.
3 Crimes per acre (crime density) is preferred over crimes per person (crime rate) because the former

variable has greater explanatory power, as we will document below.
4 Case and Mayer is not the only study to find that crime increases housing prices. Taylor (1995) includes

both levels and changes in crime rates in his attempt to explain the change in house values within

Baltimore's neighborhoods during the 1970s. While the change variables produce the expected negative

signs, crime levels are found to be positively related to value appreciation.
5 Some studies include more than one type of crime, but just two or three types. For example, Gibbons

(2004) includes vandalism and burglary crimes and Buck et al. (1993) include larceny, auto theft, and

burglary crimes. These studies are subject to the same criticism noted below of single crime variable

studies; namely, omitted crime types that may affect property values are correlated with included crime

types, resulting in possible omitted variable bias.
6 A number of studies have attempted to calculate the cost incurred by victims of different types of crimes,

where total cost is inclusive of both out of pocket (monetary) cost and the psychic cost associated with pain

and suffering. All of these studies demonstrate that violent crime carries a higher cost than property crime.

For example, Cohen et al. (1995) estimate that the total cost of a rape is $87 000, while that of a motor

vehicle theft is $4000 (measured in 1993 dollars).
7 For a review of the literature that links income to crime, see Eide (1994).
8 For example, it is well known that homeowners prefer lower density neighborhoods, invalidating the use

of population density as an instrumental variable.
9 Gibbons is fully aware of the problem created by excluding a violent crime measure from his hedonic

model. He offers some evidence using data at a higher level of spatial aggregation (equivalent to counties

in the U.S.) that suggests that the omitted variable problem may not be severe. These data show that

changes in crime rates of different types of crimes are not highly correlated. But this evidence has little

relevance to his model, since his crime measures are not change (i.e., first differenced) variables.
10 More information on the PLSS can be found at http://nationalatlas.gov/articles/boundaries/a_plss.html.

Each township/range/section combination typically corresponds to a one-mile by one-mile square.

Although quite rare, it can be the case that the TRS code identifies a geographic area that is larger or

smaller than one square mile. This might be the case, for instance, in sections near jagged borders (e.g.,

near the coast).
11 The FDOR rolls can be matched with digital parcel maps using a unique parcel number from the tax

rolls. Because these digital maps are only available for 2007, however, a number of problems arise when

attempting to use the maps to determine the location of parcels from tax rolls prior to 2007. For instance, if

a parcel was undeveloped in 2000, and then developed in 2001, the parcel identifier would generally

change between the two years. Given the way the digital parcel map is formatted, this change in parcel

number would make it impossible to identify the correct geography for the undeveloped parcel in 2000. As

these types of matching problems appeared to lead to nontrivial loss of information, we decided to use the

PLSS codes as the geographic identifiers, which do not suffer from the aforementioned matching problems.
12 We use tract boundary files from the 2000 Census to generate this crosswalk.
13 For the sake of expository flow, we refer to our neighborhood unit as a tract, as opposed to `tract-like'

hereafter.
14 As noted above, although the times and dates of rapes are reported in our database, the locational

information of the incident is excluded so as to protect the identity of the victim. Hence we exclude rape

from our definition of violent crime.
15 See Harries (1981) for a review of the literature on this issue.
16 After first differencing the data, the endogeneity issue is whether criminals are more likely to move into

neighborhoods experiencing less price appreciation. This is not clear, but what is clear is that endogeneity

arising from the movement of criminals is less likely to be a concern in comparison to that which arises

from the location of criminals.
17 As noted above, we use three alternative measures of crime ­ the number of crimes in the tract, the crime

rate in the tract (crimes/population), and the crime density in the tract (crimes/acre). The latter variable is

our preferred measure because, as we document below, it explains the most variation in our dependent

variable (the change in the price index).
18 For a discussion on instrumentation in distributed lag models, see Wooldridge (2002, p. 307).
19 Recall that we exclude one of the seven indexed crimes (namely, rape) because the location of these

crimes is not reported.
20 P-values on the F-statistics, which are robust to both heteroskedasticity and serial correlation, are in all
cases equal to .000. In the case where sequential exogeneity is assumed and just Ct is instrumented, there
are only two endogenous variables. With three or fewer endogenous variables, Stock and Yogo's (2005)
test for weak instruments can be done. Weak instruments refer to instruments whose correlation with an
endogenous variable is not strong enough to avoid a biased IV estimator. Stock and Yogo's test involves

comparing the first-stage F-statistic to a critical value. In our case the critical value is 11 and the two F-

statistics are 17 (violent crime) and 13 (property crime); hence we can conclude that our instruments are not
`weak.'
21We also estimated (2) excluding from the set of instruments those land use categories that represent
shopping, eating and drinking establishments. This change had little effect on our results. When
instrumenting Ct, the estimated LRP on violent crime is -1236 (versus -1177 using the full set of
commercial land uses) and the estimated elasticity of the house price index with respect to violent crime is -
.250 (versus -.238 using all commercial land uses). When instrumenting both Ct and Ct-1, the estimated
LRP is -1042 (versus -1020) and the estimated elasticity is -.210 (versus -.206).
22 Home buyers may also feel that their homeowner's insurance protects them from the monetary losses that
may result from property crime.
